README.md, before:

# Keisan

[![Build Status](https://travis-ci.org/project-eutopia/keisan.png?branch=master)](https://travis-ci.org/project-eutopia/keisan)

Keisan ([計算, to calculate](https://en.wiktionary.org/wiki/%E8%A8%88%E7%AE%97#Japanese)) is a Ruby library for parsing equations into an abstract syntax tree.  This allows for safe evaluation of string representations of mathematical/logical expressions.

## Installation

Add this line to your application's Gemfile:

```ruby
gem 'keisan'
```

And then execute:

    $ bundle

Or install it yourself as:

    $ gem install keisan

## Usage

### Calculator class

The functionality of `keisan` can be demonstrated by using the `Keisan::Calculator` class.  The `evaluate` method evaluates an expression by parsing it into an abstract syntax tree (AST), then evaluating any member functions/variables given.

```ruby
calculator = Keisan::Calculator.new
calculator.evaluate("15 + 2 * (1 + 3)")
#=> 23
```

##### Specifying variables

Passing in a hash of variable (`name`, `value`) pairs to the `evaluate` method defines variables

```ruby
calculator.evaluate("3*x + y**2", x: -2.5, y: 3)
#=> 1.5
```

It will raise an error if an variable is not defined

```ruby
calculator.evaluate("x + 1")
#=> Keisan::Exceptions::UndefinedVariableError: x
```

##### Specifying functions

Just like variables, functions can be defined by passing a `Proc` object as follows

```ruby
calculator.evaluate("2*f(1+2) + 4", f: Proc.new {|x| x**2})
#=> 22
```

It will raise an error if a function is not defined

```ruby
calculator.evaluate("f(2) + 1")
#=> Keisan::Exceptions::UndefinedFunctionError: f
```

##### Lists

Just like in Ruby, lists can be defined using square brackets, and indexed using square brackets

```ruby
calculator.evaluate("[2, 3, 5, 8]")
#=> [2, 3, 5, 8]
calculator.evaluate("[[1,2,3],[4,5,6],[7,8,9]][1][2]")
#=> 6
```

They can also be concatenated using the `+` operator

```ruby
calculator.evaluate("[3, 5] + [x, x+1]", x: 10)
#=> [3, 5, 10, 11]
```

##### Logical operations

`keisan` understands basic boolean logic operators, like `<`, `<=`, `>`, `>=`, `&&`, `||`, `!`, so calculations like the following are possible

```
calculator.evaluate("1 > 0")
#=> true
calculator.evaluate("!!!true")
#=> false
calculator.evaluate("x >= 0 && x < 10", x: 5)
#=> true
```

There is also a useful ternary `if` function defined

```ruby
calculator.evaluate("2 + if(1 > 0, 10, 29)")
#=> 12
```

##### Bitwise operations

The basic bitwise operations, NOT `~`, OR `|`, XOR `^`, and AND `&` are also available for use

```ruby
calculator.evaluate("2 + 12 & 7")
#=> 6
```

##### String

`keisan` also can parse in strings, and access the characters by index

```ruby
calculator.evaluate("'hello'[1]")                                                               
#=> "e"
```

##### Builtin variables and functions

`keisan` includes all standard methods given by the Ruby `Math` class.

```ruby
calculator.evaluate("log10(1000)")
#=> 3.0
```

Furthermore, the following builtin constants are defined

```ruby
calculator.evaluate("pi")
#=> 3.141592653589793
calculator.evaluate("e")
#=> 2.718281828459045
calculator.evaluate("i")
#=> (0+1i)
```

This allows for simple calculations like

```ruby
calculator.evaluate("e**(i*pi)+1")
=> (0.0+0.0i)
```

## Development

After checking out the repository, run `bin/setup` to install dependencies. Then, run `rake spec` to run the tests.  You can also run `bin/console` for an interactive prompt that will allow you to experiment.

To install this gem onto your local machine, run `bundle exec rake install`.  To release a new version, update the version number in `version.rb`, and then run `bundle exec rake release`, which will create a git tag for the version, push git commits and tags, and push the `.gem` file to [rubygems.org](https://rubygems.org).

## Contributing

Bug reports and pull requests are welcome on GitHub at https://github.com/project-eutopia/keisan.  If there is any functionality you would like (e.g. new functions), feel free to open a [new issue](https://github.com/project-eutopia/keisan/issues/new).

Commit message:

Add `define_variable!` and `define_function!`

README.md, after:

# Keisan

[![Build Status](https://travis-ci.org/project-eutopia/keisan.png?branch=master)](https://travis-ci.org/project-eutopia/keisan)

Keisan ([計算, to calculate](https://en.wiktionary.org/wiki/%E8%A8%88%E7%AE%97#Japanese)) is a Ruby library for parsing equations into an abstract syntax tree.  This allows for safe evaluation of string representations of mathematical/logical expressions.

## Installation

Add this line to your application's Gemfile:

```ruby
gem 'keisan'
```

And then execute:

    $ bundle

Or install it yourself as:

    $ gem install keisan

## Usage

### Calculator class

The functionality of `keisan` can be demonstrated by using the `Keisan::Calculator` class.  The `evaluate` method evaluates an expression by parsing it into an abstract syntax tree (AST), then evaluating any member functions/variables given.

```ruby
calculator = Keisan::Calculator.new
calculator.evaluate("15 + 2 * (1 + 3)")
#=> 23
```

##### Specifying variables

Passing in a hash of variable (`name`, `value`) pairs to the `evaluate` method defines variables

```ruby
calculator.evaluate("3*x + y**2", x: -2.5, y: 3)
#=> 1.5
```

It will raise an error if an variable is not defined

```ruby
calculator.evaluate("x + 1")
#=> Keisan::Exceptions::UndefinedVariableError: x
```

##### Specifying functions

Just like variables, functions can be defined by passing a `Proc` object as follows

```ruby
calculator.evaluate("2*f(1+2) + 4", f: Proc.new {|x| x**2})
#=> 22
```

It will raise an error if a function is not defined

```ruby
calculator.evaluate("f(2) + 1")
#=> Keisan::Exceptions::UndefinedFunctionError: f
```

##### Lists

Just like in Ruby, lists can be defined using square brackets, and indexed using square brackets

```ruby
calculator.evaluate("[2, 3, 5, 8]")
#=> [2, 3, 5, 8]
calculator.evaluate("[[1,2,3],[4,5,6],[7,8,9]][1][2]")
#=> 6
```

They can also be concatenated using the `+` operator

```ruby
calculator.evaluate("[3, 5] + [x, x+1]", x: 10)
#=> [3, 5, 10, 11]
```

##### Logical operations

`keisan` understands basic boolean logic operators, like `<`, `<=`, `>`, `>=`, `&&`, `||`, `!`, so calculations like the following are possible

```
calculator.evaluate("1 > 0")
#=> true
calculator.evaluate("!!!true")
#=> false
calculator.evaluate("x >= 0 && x < 10", x: 5)
#=> true
```

There is also a useful ternary `if` function defined

```ruby
calculator.evaluate("2 + if(1 > 0, 10, 29)")
#=> 12
```

##### Bitwise operations

The basic bitwise operations, NOT `~`, OR `|`, XOR `^`, and AND `&` are also available for use

```ruby
calculator.evaluate("2 + 12 & 7")
#=> 6
```

##### String

`keisan` also can parse in strings, and access the characters by index

```ruby
calculator.evaluate("'hello'[1]")
#=> "e"
```

##### Builtin variables and functions

`keisan` includes all standard methods given by the Ruby `Math` class.

```ruby
calculator.evaluate("log10(1000)")
#=> 3.0
```

Furthermore, the following builtin constants are defined

```ruby
calculator.evaluate("pi")
#=> 3.141592653589793
calculator.evaluate("e")
#=> 2.718281828459045
calculator.evaluate("i")
#=> (0+1i)
```

This allows for simple calculations like

```ruby
calculator.evaluate("e**(i*pi)+1")
=> (0.0+0.0i)
```

### Adding custom variables and functions

The `Keisan::Calculator` class has a single `Keisan::Context` object in its `context` attribute.  This class is used to store local variables and functions.  As an example of pre-defining some variables and functions, see the following

```ruby
calculator.define_variable!("x", 5)
#=> 5
calculator.evaluate("x + 1")
#=> 6
calculator.evaluate("x + 1", x: 10)
#=> 11
calculator.evaluate("x + 1")
#=> 6
```

Notice how when passing variable values directly to the `evaluate` method, it only shadows the value of 5 for that specific calculation.  The same thing works for functions

```ruby
calculator.define_function!("f", Proc.new {|x| 3*x})
#=> #<Keisan::Function:0x005570f935ecc8 @function_proc=#<Proc:0x005570f935ecf0@(pry):6>, @name="f">
calculator.evaluate("f(2)")
#=> 6
calculator.evaluate("f(2)", f: Proc.new {|x| 10*x})
#=> 20
calculator.evaluate("f(2)")
#=> 6
```

## Development

After checking out the repository, run `bin/setup` to install dependencies. Then, run `rake spec` to run the tests.  You can also run `bin/console` for an interactive prompt that will allow you to experiment.

To install this gem onto your local machine, run `bundle exec rake install`.  To release a new version, update the version number in `version.rb`, and then run `bundle exec rake release`, which will create a git tag for the version, push git commits and tags, and push the `.gem` file to [rubygems.org](https://rubygems.org).

## Contributing

Bug reports and pull requests are welcome on GitHub at https://github.com/project-eutopia/keisan.  If there is any functionality you would like (e.g. new functions), feel free to open a [new issue](https://github.com/project-eutopia/keisan/issues/new).
